we here at MSNBC tonight have an
embarrassment of riches you just saw
Governor O'Malley there live with my
friend Chris Hayes Vermont senator and
Democratic presidential candidate Bernie
Sanders is here tonight in my studio for
the interview
settle in it's going to be a good night
but our conversation starts on March
24th 1994 at the time I was just about
to turn 21 I had just moved to San
Francisco I was an AIDS activist it was
still a couple of years before protease
inhibitors were around to treat HIV
infection and I remember that at the
time it just felt like the AIDS epidemic
was roaring through the gay community
roaring through my community and
honestly I didn't care all that much
about electoral politics at the time I
cared about the activist issues that I
was working on which I saw as life and
death issues I cared about policy I
cared about you know local stuff and
things directly related to the activist
campaigns I was involved in but for
better for worse judge me for it if you
will I honestly at the time as a 20 year
old did not much care about the
presidency nor did I care that much
about the Congress but even then even
with that mindset at the time I remember
when in March 1994 a closeted member of
Congress got outed as gay on the floor
of the House of Representatives in
Congress in a spit flying furious floor
speech this member of Congress who I had
otherwise never heard of got out it got
forced out of the closet by a rabid
right-wing Republican congressman named
Bob Dornan look I was born in Manhattan
and I was raised in Beverly Hills
from 10 to 19 when I went the airports
and those two communities have a
particular penchant for poisoning little
Dorothy's Kansas or Iowa or other parts
of this country now the last Republican
gentlemen the last Republican for the
state of New York or Minister Speaker
point of personal privilege
I asked the gentleman to with joins
comment about my district boy I'm on the
rest of the country ridiculous teacher
parlor gentleman may not assert upon a
personal privilege the gentleman will
reason now the last gentleman in the in
the well a Republican I guess quoting my
wife again has a revolving door on his
closet he's in these out he's in he's
out he's in now I guess you're out
because you went up and spoke to a huge
homosexual dinner last week mr.
Gunderson or week before last if I read
the papers correctly if I don't correct
mr. chair mr. chairman and I think this
conversation is out of order and has no
flavor years ago from Michigan demands
that the words be take him down I'll
wait sick of this the clerk will report
the gentleman's words because the
gentleman's words were reported the
words were taken down that means they
were taken out of the congressional
record and so maybe that's why
congressman Bob Dornan was not censured
for making that kind of a personal
attack on another member of Congress
from the floor of the house you're not
supposed to be able to do something like
that as a member of Congress but because
his words were taken down that was
supposed to basically unring the Bell
make it so he never said it but he did
that March day in 1994 Bob Dornan really
did out on the floor of the House of
Representatives a Republican congressman
named Steve Gunderson who had never
publicly revealed he was gay but who had
kind of tiptoed to the edge of coming
out in front of some gay audiences and
Bob Dornan outed him as a way of selling
his own anti-gay legislation to try to
ban school districts from ever saying
anything about the existence of gay
people particularly in relation to the
issue of AIDS and Steve Gunderson
weathered it he actually got reelected
again from his Wisconsin district later
that year but those were nasty nasty
times and two years after Bob Dornan
outed Steve Gunderson on the floor of
the house congressman Gunderson became
the lone Republican on the very lonely
side of a vote that still resonates
right now in the race for the presidency
this year it was a vote on something
called the Defense of Marriage Act from
that bill banned federal recognition of
marriages between same-sex couples it
passed the House by a huge margin 342
votes in favor only 67 votes opposed of
the 67 votes opposed 65 of them were
Democrats one of them was Republican
Steve Gunderson and one of them was an
independent socialist Vermont
congressman Bernie Sanders that anti-gay
bill passed by such huge margins in the
house and in the Senate the vote in the
Senate was 85 to 14 it passed by such
big margins that if President Clinton
had vetoed that bill his veto likely
would have been overridden and pretty
easily the bill would have become law
anyway even if President Clinton had
vetoed it but President Clinton didn't
veto it he signed it and before the
house even passed it weeks before they
passed it he said that he would sign it
if they did pass it and then after he
signed it he ran radio ads touting the
fact that he had signed it in the last
few weeks before President Clinton then
went on to wallop Republican Bob Dole in
the 1996 presidential election and now
of course it is a very different time
former President Clinton said in 2013
that his own law that DOMA law should be
overturned and it was it was overturned
by the United States Supreme Court and
one of the biggest gay rights legal
victories of all time both former
President Clinton and former Secretary
of State Clinton have now said they are
of course in favor of marriage equality
more than that Secretary Clinton became
a vocal champion of gay rights both now
as a presidential candidate and before
that in her time as Secretary of State
she even promoted some landmark pro gay
rights legislation as a senator from the
great state of New York and now we're in
a position where if you want to talk
about a divided on this issue it's
between the parties the parties could
not be more different on this issue all
the Beltway happy talk about how gay
rights is settled we supposedly had this
great evolution and support of gay
rights in this country but consider just
how deeply and uniformly anti-gay the
Republican field is this year I mean
even the supposedly newfangled
Republicans all agree that it is totally
kosher and ought to be totally legal for
you to be fired for being gay or if your
boss thinks you might
be and forget it on marriage none of
them support marriage rights meanwhile
on the other side of the partisan aisle
if you are a supporter of gay rights you
have an embarrassment of riches among
the Democratic presidential frontrunner
this year you cannot find a whisper of
difference between senator Sanders and
Secretary Clinton in terms of their
commitment to equal rights now but there
was a difference back in the day back in
the bad old outing closeted congressmen
on the floor of the house days of the
mid-1990s and even for people who had no
interest in electoral politics at the
time even like 20-year old me boy did
that send a shiver down my spine and
there's you know there is a difference
now I have to say between presidential
candidate Bernie Sanders and
presidential candidate Hillary Clinton
even though there is no issue now no
difference now between them in terms of
what policies they support now there is
a difference between them as candidates
as to whether or not President Bill
Clinton signing that anti-gay law
whether that was an anti-gay and
lamentable mistake that never should
happened or whether as Secretary Clinton
argued here on Friday night it was
actually a well-meaning effort a
well-meaning effort to head off a
greater harm that would have been done
had President Bill Clinton not signed
that discriminatory bill but one of the
things that I have been struck by during
the Obama administration is that a lot
of the really the civil rights
achievements of this administration have
actually been undoing things that were
done in the Clinton administration
whether was Don't Ask Don't Tell or the
Defense of Marriage Act or the you know
tough on crime mandatory sentences
former President Clinton is progressive
on all those issues right now but the
policies that he signed for politically
practical reasons in the 90s have taken
you know the political mural miracle of
Barack Obama's election and and in a
decade of progressive activism to unwind
those things to get back to zero and so
I know that you and President Clinton
are different people and I know that I
don't want you you're not responsible
for what he did as president but is your
approach to civil rights issues the same
as his or is it different well I
I want to say a word about the the
issues you mentioned because my my my
take on it is slightly different on
defense of marriage I think what my
husband believed and there was certainly
evidence to support it is that there was
enough political momentum to amend the
Constitution of the United States of
America and that there had to be some
way to stop that and there wasn't any
rational argument because I was in on
some of those discussions on both Don't
Ask Don't Tell and on on DOMA where both
the president his advisors and
occasionally I would you know chime in
and talk about can't be serious you
can't be serious but they were and so in
in a lot of ways DOMA was a line that
was drawn that was to prevent going
further it was a defensive action it was
a defensive action the culture rapidly
changed so that now what was totally
anathema to political forces had they
have seated they no longer our fighting
except on a local level and a rearguard
action and with the US Supreme Court
decision it's settled most gay rights
activists say that actually there wasn't
an active threat of an anti-gay federal
constitutional amendment at the time
that President Clinton signed DOMA in
fact the real push for that kind of an
amendment did not really come until the
George W Bush administration
I mean honestly bottom line fast forward
to today Hillary Clinton and former
President Bill Clinton both support
equal marriage rights with gusto neither
one of them would support that anti-gay
bill today but they did back then and
Hillary Clinton's presidential primary
opponent Bernie Sanders is going out of
his way to make sure that history about
this matter is told in the right way in
1996 I faced another fork in the road a
very very difficult political situation
it was called the Defense of Marriage
Act DOMA
brought forth brought forth by
republican-led Congress and its purpose
was clear to discriminate against gays
and lesbians into the law and let us all
remember the gay and lesbian rights were
not popular then as they are today it
was a tough vote and I'm sorry to have
to tell you that that bill won by an
overwhelming majority in the house of
342 to 57 that was not a political easy
vote now today some were trying to
rewrite history by saying they voted for
one anti-gay law to stop something worse
that's not the case there was a small
minority in the house opposed to
discriminating against our gay brothers
and sisters and I am proud that I was
one of those feathers senator bernie
sanders speaking this weekend in iowa
and tonight he's here live for the
interview senator sanders thank you so
much for being here it's really nice to
see you back great to be with your
region um so you have been remarkably
consistent in your policy positions over
the years also your style you have as
far as I can tell in 35 years in public
office you have never run a negative ad
against an opponent I can find no
instances of you even saying anything
particularly nasty or even sharp-tongued
about an opponent but you you are
drawing a sharp contrast Here I am and
and the reason that I am is I think it's
important for voters in the Democratic
primary process to understand one very
important fact yes it is a good idea
that recently for example Hillary
Clinton has decided to oppose the TPP
trans-pacific partnership that's great
Chad you did that well I have been
opposed to these disastrous trade
agreements from day one I'm glad that
Hillary Clinton has
come on board and now said well she's
against the Keystone pipeline well you
know what if you take climate change
seriously and you understand the
cataclysmic impact that it will have on
this planet it is a no-brainer I've been
against that from day one everybody
knows that and then we get to this issue
of DOMA he was my point it was a simple
point I have had in many years and
politics had to make tough votes and let
me as you just indicated the times then
were very very different we had a lot of
homophobia go yellow right-wing
Republican leadership clearly trying to
push this anti-gay legislation and it
bothered me to hear a Secretary Clinton
saying well you know
dolma what really was about us to
prevent something even worse well that
just wasn't true it wasn't true and I
think you know if you hear today what
many of the gay activists are saying
they will concur with me hilary rosen
who you know sure she's a supporter of
Secretary Clinton she said Bernie
Sanders is right no to my friends Bill
and Hillary please stop saying DOMA was
to prevent something worse
it wasn't I was there end of quote so my
only point there was that was a tough
vote it really was and there were a lot
of decent people who in their hearts
wanted to vote no and voted yes for
political reasons I didn't that's all
the point that I want to make as you've
drawn those those points of contrast in
the Jefferson Jackson dinner speech and
again right here and throughout your
campaign you have pointed out some of
these issues on which you basically are
arguing you were right from day one on
TPP on Keystone on the Iraq war vote on
on DOMA on all of those issues you and
Secretary Clinton agree now yes and so I
wonder if I could just just zero in on
exactly why you think it's important
that you were right first what do when
Democratic voters are making the
decision about who their nominee ought
to be why are you a better choice on
those grounds it's an excellent and fair
question and the answer is we live in a
tough world and leadership counts it's
great that people evolve and change
their minds that I respect that I'm not
being the meaning here but it is
important to stand up when
the going is tough and that was a
particularly tough vote and if you look
at my career I have taken on every
special interest when it was tough to do
and where we are right now in American
history is we have a rigged economy with
Wall Street and the big money interest
exerting huge power of the economy we
have a corrupt campaign finance system
with super PACs prepared to buy
elections what the American people and
Democrats have to know which candidate
historically has had the guts to stand
up to powerful people and take difficult
decisions that's the point that I was
trying to make and I think anyone reads
my record from when I was mayor
Burlington where I took on the entire
establishment as a member of Congress
was a leader in so many areas United
States Senator I think that they will
conclude that when the going was tough
when leadership was needed I was there I
have one more question that I want to
ask you on this subject and then I have
a whole bunch of questions on a whole
bunch of other subjects will you stay
sure absolutely
my first victory will be right back with
senator Bernie Sanders hey YouTube fans
I'm Luke Russert thanks for checking out
our MSNBC channel subscribe by clicking
right here and click any of the videos
over here to watch the latest breaking
news mini documentaries conversations
from shift' and other digital exclusives
check it out